Module 1 notes
---------------------------------------

The six steps of the data analysis process:
-ASK
-PREPARE
-PROCESS
-ANALYZE
-SHARE
-ACT

Great analysts know how to respect both their data and the people who provide it.

Collecting and using data ethically is one of the responsibilities of data analysts.

Interested in People Analytics?

Difference between data scientists and data analysts:

Data Science - creating new ways of modeling and understanding the unknown by using raw data.

Data analysis is the collection, transformation, and organization of data in order to draw conclusions,
make predictions, and drive informed decision-making.

Data analytics is the science of data.

Data-driven decision making - Using facts to guide business strategy
-figure out the business need

Data + business knowledge = mystery solved

Blending data with business knowledge, plus maybe a touch of gut instinct, will be a common part of your process as a junior data analyst. The key is figuring out the exact mix for each particular project. A lot of times, it will depend on the goals of your analysis. That is why analysts often ask, “How do I define success for this project?”

What kind of results are needed?

Who will be informed?

Am I answering the question being asked?

How quickly does a decision need to be made?

Data ecosystems
The various elements that interact with one another in order to produce, manage, store, organize, analyze, and share data.

5 Analytical Skills
Curiosity
Understanding Context
Having a technical mindset
Data design
Data strategy

Analytical Thinking
Identifying and defining a problem and then solving it by using data in an organized, step-by-step manner.

5 keys to analytical thinking:
Visualization - the graphical representation of information
Strategy
Problem-orientation
Correlation
Big-picture and detail-oriented thinking

What is the root cause of a problem?

the Five Whys
ask why five times to reveal the root cause.

Where are the gaps in our process?

Gap analysis:
A method for examining and evaluating how a process works currently in order to get where you want to be in the future.

What did we not consider before?

A quartile divides data points into 4 equal parts.
