course 2, module 3 notes
-----------------------
common math functions in spreadsheets
sum
average
count
min
max
-----
organize your data
    -pivot table
        -sort and filter
calculate data
    -formulas and functions
Data Life Cycle

PLAN for the users who will work within a spreadsheet by developing organizational standards. This can mean formatting your cells, the headings you choose to highlight, the color scheme, and the way you order your data points. When you take the time to set these standards, you will improve communication, ensure consistency, and help people be more efficient with their time.

CAPTURE data by the source by connecting spreadsheets to other data sources, such as an online survey application or a database. This data will automatically be updated in the spreadsheet. That way, the information is always as current and accurate as possible.

MANAGE different kinds of data with a spreadsheet. This can involve storing, organizing, filtering, and updating information. Spreadsheets also let you decide who can access the data, how the information is shared, and how to keep your data safe and secure.

ANALYZE data in a spreadsheet to help make better decisions. Some of the most common spreadsheet analysis tools include formulas to aggregate data or create reports, and pivot tables for clear, easy-to-understand visuals.

ARCHIVE any spreadsheet that you don’t use often, but might need to reference later with built-in tools. This is especially useful if you want to store historical data before it gets updated.

DESTROY your spreadsheet when you are certain that you will never need it again, if you have better backup copies, or for legal or security reasons. Keep in mind, lots of businesses are required to follow certain rules or have measures in place to make sure data is destroyed properly.

Operators - a symbol that names the type of operation or calculation to be performed
+ - = / * () & %
Formulas in spreadsheets START with an = sign.
example:
    =A3-B3
    =(A2 * C2)/C2
    =(A2+B2+C2+D2)/4

Cell reference - A cell or range of cells in a worksheet that can be used in a formula
Range - A collection of 2 or more cells

Formulas
The basics
When you enter a formula in math, it generally ends with an equal sign (2 + 3 = ?). But with formulas, they always start with one instead (=A2+A3). The equal sign tells the spreadsheet that what follows is part of a formula, not just a word or number in a cell.

After you enter the equal sign, most spreadsheet applications will display an autocomplete menu that lists valid formulas, names, and text strings. This is a great way to create and edit formulas while avoiding typing and syntax errors.

A fun way to learn new formulas is just by typing an equal sign and a single letter of the alphabet. Choose one of the options that pops up and you will learn what that formula does.

Auto-filling
The lower-right corner of each cell has a fill handle. It is a small green square in Microsoft Excel and a small blue circle in Google Sheets.

Click the fill handle square or circle for a cell and drag it down a column to auto-fill other cells in the column with the same value or formula in that cell.

Click the fill handle square or circle for a cell and drag it across a row to auto-fill other cells in the row with the same value or formula in that cell.

If you want to create a numbered sequence in a column or row, do the following:
1) Fill in the first two numbers of the sequence in two adjacent cells,
2) Select to highlight the cells, and
3) Drag the fill handle square or circle to the last cell to complete the sequence of numbers. For example, to insert 1 through 100 in each row of column A, enter 1 in cell A1 and 2 in cell A2. Then, select to highlight both cells, click the fill handle square or circle in cell A2, and drag it down to cell A100. This auto-fills the numbers sequentially so you don't have to enter them in each cell.

Absolute referencing
Absolute referencing is marked by a dollar sign ($). For example, =$A$10 has absolute referencing for both the column and the row value

Relative references (which is what you normally do, e.g. “=A10”) will change anytime the formula is copied and pasted. They are in relation to where the referenced cell is located. For example if you copied “=A10” to the cell to the right it would become “=B10”. With absolute referencing “=$A$10” copied to the cell to the right would remain “=$A$10”. But if you copied $A10 to the cell below, it would change to $A11 because the row value isn't an absolute reference.

Absolute references will not change when you copy and paste the formula in a different cell. The cell being referenced is always the same.

To easily switch between absolute and relative referencing in the formula bar, highlight the reference you want to change and press the F4 key; for example, if you want to change the absolute reference, $A$10, in your formula to a relative reference, A10, highlight $A$10 in the formula bar and then press the F4 key to make the change.

Data range
When you click into your formula, the colored ranges let you see which cells are being used in your spreadsheet. There are different colors for each unique range in your formula.

In a lot of spreadsheet applications, you can press the F2 (or Enter) key to highlight the range of data in the spreadsheet that is referenced in a formula. Click the cell with the formula, and then press the F2 (or Enter) key to highlight the data in your spreadsheet.

Combining with functions
COUNTIF() is a formula and a function. This means the function runs based on criteria set by the formula. In this case, COUNT is the formula; it will be executed IF the conditions you create are true. For example, you could use =COUNTIF(A1:A16, “7”) to count only the cells that contained the number 7. Combining formulas and functions allows you to do more work with a single command.

delimiter - a comma (,) used to divide cell ranges in a formula

if trying to divide by zero, try this formula to avoid a DIV error: =iferror(B4/A4, "Not Applicable")

#N/A error - dfata in a formula cant be found by the spreadsheet.

=VLOOKUP finds things in a list and will perform a calculation
there could be an N/A error if the information in the VLOOKUP function does not exist in the spreadsheet or there is no match.
check spelling or plural case here.

#NAME? error - a formula or function name isn't understood
if this appears, check spelling and proper syntax of the function or formula you are using.

#NUM error - a formula or function calculation can't be performed as specified.

=DATEDIF function is used to calculate dates
start date is in first, then end date, followed by
example: =DATEDIF(B2,C2, "M")
"M" denotes that we are calculating months

if the start date is after or the same day as an end date, the DATEDIF function will not work.

#VALUE! error - a general error that could indicate a problem with a formula or referenced cells.
could be an issue where a name was put in a cell that is supposed to hold number information. this would make any number calculation impossible.

The error message ERROR (also called a parsing error) will appear when a formula cannot be interpreted as it is written. The DIV error message will appear when a formula is trying to divide a value in a cell by zero or by an empty cell.

#REF! error - a formula is referencing a cell that is no longer valid or has been deleted.

if you are referencing cells that have been deleted, simply change the formula to no longer include that cell.

you can avoid this error by using the SUM function for a range of cells instead of manually adding each cell into the function by direct reference.

here are a few best practices and helpful tips. These strategies will help you avoid spreadsheet errors to begin with, making your life in analytics a whole lot less stressful:

Filter data to make your spreadsheet less complex and busy.

Use and freeze headers so you know what is in each column, even when scrolling.

When multiplying numbers, use an asterisk (*) not an X.

Start every formula and function with an equal sign (=).

Whenever you use an open parenthesis, make sure there is a closed parenthesis on the other end to match.

Change the font to something easy to read.

Set the border colors to white so that you are working in a blank sheet.

Create a tab with just the raw data, and a separate tab with just the data you need.


Note: The colon (:) between B2 and E2 in the formula indicates that you are specifying a range. In this case, it's the range of cells from B2 to E2. The SUM function will add up the values in these cells to calculate the total sales for the specified time frame.


Formulas
----------------------
function - preset command that automatically performs a specific process or task using data

SUM
MIN
MAX
(e2-d2)/d2 - average


Difference between formulas and functions
A formula is a set of instructions used to perform a calculation using the data in a spreadsheet.

A function is a preset command that automatically performs a specific process or task using the data in a spreadsheet.


Relative, absolute, and mixed references
Relative references (cells referenced without a dollar sign, like A2) will change when you copy and paste the function into a different cell. With relative references, the location of the cell that contains the function determines the cells used by the function.

Absolute references (cells fully referenced with a dollar sign, like $A$2) will not change when you copy and paste the function into a different cell. With absolute references, the cells referenced always remain the same.

Mixed references (cells partially referenced with a dollar sign, like $A2 or A$2) will change when you copy and paste the function into a different cell. With mixed references, the location of the cell that contains the function determines the cells used by the function, but only the row or column is relative (not both).

In spreadsheets, you can press the F4 key to toggle between relative, absolute, and mixed references in a function. Click the cell containing the function, highlight the referenced cells in the formula bar, and then press F4 to toggle between and select relative, absolute, or mixed referencing.

COUNTIF is an example of a function that returns a value based on a condition that the data range is evaluated for. The function counts the number of cells that meet the criteria. For example, in an expense spreadsheet, use COUNTIF to count the number of cells that contain a reimbursement for "airfare."

problem domain - the specific area of analysis that encompasses every activity affecting or affected by the problem.

structured thinking - train your brain to think structurally.
the process of recognizing the current problem or situation, organizing available information, revealing gaps and opportunities, and identifying the options .

spend 59 minutes defining the problem and 1 minute re-solving it.

Scope of Work (SOW) - an agreed-upon outline of the work you're going to perform on a project.
work details
schedules
reports
data preparation
validation
analaysis of qualitative and quantitative datasets
initial results
visuals
deliverables
timeline
milestones

context - the condition in which something exists or happens

The best thing you can do for the fairness and accuracy of your data, is to make sure you start with an accurate representation of the population, and collect the data in the most appropriate, and objective way. Then, you'll have the facts so you can pass on to your team. Hopefully you now understand the importance of fair and objective data, and how important a context is, when it comes to understanding and interpreting it.

Context in data analytics is the condition and circumstances that surround and give meaning to the data. Context is important in data analytics because it helps make disorganized data accessible and understood. The fact is, data has little value if it is not paired with context.
