Course 2, module 1 notes
------------------------------
Ask
Prepare
Process
Analyze
Share
Act

Step 1: Ask
It’s impossible to solve a problem if you don’t know what it is. These are some things to consider:

Define the problem you’re trying to solve

Make sure you fully understand the stakeholder’s expectations

Focus on the actual problem and avoid any distractions

Collaborate with stakeholders and keep an open line of communication

Take a step back and see the whole situation in context

Questions to ask yourself in this step:
What are my stakeholders saying their problems are?

Now that I’ve identified the issues, how can I help the stakeholders resolve their questions?

Step 2: Prepare
You will decide what data you need to collect in order to answer your questions and how to organize it so that it is useful. You might use your business task to decide:

What metrics to measure

Locate data in your database

Create security measures to protect that data

Questions to ask yourself in this step:
What do I need to figure out how to solve this problem?

What research do I need to do?

Step 3: Process
Clean data is the best data and you will need to clean up your data to get rid of any possible errors, inaccuracies, or inconsistencies. This might mean:

Using spreadsheet functions to find incorrectly entered data

Using SQL functions to check for extra spaces

Removing repeated entries

Checking as much as possible for bias in the data

Questions to ask yourself in this step:
What data errors or inaccuracies might get in my way of getting the best possible answer to the problem I am trying to solve?

How can I clean my data so the information I have is more consistent?

Step 4: Analyze
You will want to think analytically about your data. At this stage, you might sort and format your data to make it easier to:

Perform calculations

Combine data from multiple sources

Create tables with your results

Questions to ask yourself in this step:
What story is my data telling me?

How will my data help me solve this problem?

Who needs my company’s product or service? What type of person is most likely to use it?

Step 5: Share
Everyone shares their results differently so be sure to summarize your results with clear and enticing visuals of your analysis using data via tools like graphs or dashboards. This is your chance to show the stakeholders you have solved their problem and how you got there. Sharing will certainly help your team:

Make better decisions

Make more informed decisions

Lead to stronger outcomes

Successfully communicate your findings

Questions to ask yourself in this step:
How can I make what I present to the stakeholders engaging and easy to understand?

What would help me understand this if I were the listener?

Step 6: Act
Now it’s time to act on your data. You will take everything you have learned from your data analysis and put it to use. This could mean providing your stakeholders with recommendations based on your findings so they can make data-driven decisions.

Questions to ask yourself in this step:
How can I use the feedback I received during the share phase (step 5) to actually meet the stakeholder’s needs and expectations?

These six steps can help you to break the data analysis process into smaller, manageable parts, which is called structured thinking. This process involves four basic activities:

Recognizing the current problem or situation

Organizing available information

Revealing gaps and opportunities

Identifying your options

When you are starting out in your career as a data analyst, it is normal to feel pulled in a few different directions with your role and expectations. Following processes like the ones outlined here and using structured thinking skills can help get you back on track, fill in any gaps and let you know exactly what you need.

Problem Types
--------------------
making predictions-
using data to make an informed decision about how things may be in the future

categorizing things-
assigning information to different groups or clusters based on common features

spotting something unusual-
Identifying data that is different from the norm

identifying themes-
grouping categorized information into broader concepts

discovering connections-
finding similar challenges faced by different entities and combining data and insights to address them

finding patterns-
using historical data to understand what happened in the past and is therefore likely to happen again.

SMART Questions
-------------------
questions to avoid:
leading questions

Example: This product is too expensive, isn’t it?

This is a leading question because it suggests an answer as part of the question. A better question might be, “What is your opinion of this product?”

closed-ended questions

Example: Were you satisfied with the customer trial?

This is a closed-ended question because it doesn’t encourage people to expand on their answer. It is really easy for them to give one-word responses that aren’t very informative. A better question might be, “What did you learn about customer experience from the trial.” This encourages people to provide more detail besides “It went well.”

questions that are too vague or lack context

Example: Does the tool work for you?

This question is too vague because there is no context. Is it about comparing the new tool to the one it replaces? You just don’t know. A better inquiry might be, “When it comes to data entry, is the new tool faster, slower, or about the same as the old tool? If faster, how much time is saved? If slower, how much time is lost?” These questions give context (data entry) and help frame responses that are measurable (time).

SMART methodology
Specific - simple, significant and focused on a single topic or a few closely related ideas.
Is the question specific? Does it address the problem? Does it have context? Will it uncover a lot of the information you need?

Measurable - can be quantified and assessed.
Will the question give you answers that you can measure?

Action-oriented - encourages change.
Will the answers provide information that helps you devise some type of plan?

Relevant - relevant questions matter, are important, and have significance to the problem you're trying to solve.
 Is the question about the particular problem you are trying to solve?

Time-bound - specify the time to be studied.
Are the answers relevant to the specific time being studied?

Fairness
ensuring your questions don't create or reinforce bias.

Questions should be open-ended. This is the best way to get responses that will help you accurately qualify or disqualify potential solutions to your specific problem. So, based on the thought process, possible SMART questions might be:

On a scale of 1-10 (with 10 being the most important) how important is your car having four-wheel drive? Explain.

What are the top five features you would like to see in a car package?

What features, if included with four-wheel drive, would make you more inclined to buy the car?

How does a car having four-wheel drive contribute to its value, in your opinion?


Terms and definitions for Course 2, Module 1
Action-oriented question: A question whose answers lead to change

Cloud: A place to keep data online, rather than a computer hard drive

Data analysis process: The six phases of ask, prepare, process, analyze, share, and act whose purpose is to gain insights that drive informed decision-making

Data life cycle: The sequence of stages that data experiences, which include plan, capture, manage, analyze, archive, and destroy

Leading question: A question that steers people toward a certain response

Measurable question: A question whose answers can be quantified and assessed

Problem types: The various problems that data analysts encounter, including categorizing things, discovering connections, finding patterns, identifying themes, making predictions, and spotting something unusual

Relevant question: A question that has significance to the problem to be solved

SMART methodology: A tool for determining a question’s effectiveness based on whether it is specific, measurable, action-oriented, relevant, and time-bound

Specific question: A question that is simple, significant, and focused on a single topic or a few closely related ideas

Structured thinking: The process of recognizing the current problem or situation, organizing available information, revealing gaps and opportunities, and identifying options

Time-bound question: A question that specifies a timeframe to be studied

Unfair question: A question that makes assumptions or is difficult to answer honestly
